today we're going to talk about bottle
necking yo J did you find our six in
white what do you think fine our six in
white
okay okay it's an arsenic but it's not
new in fact it's not even all white I
mean what's with the black front really
coming from the guy with the black and
white car black hood like okay that's
different it's the same that's not the
same exact same thing not the same fine
change it that how with the custom wrap
from slick wraps front panel whole case
whatever you want even custom designs us
that's right we did do that video about
the custom wrapped our six choose any of
their existing designs or customize your
own upload it and they'll make it for
you
see wow you really can make these custom
with wraps
[Music]
today we're gonna talk specifically
about bottle necking a topic we haven't
really covered on this channel in quite
a long time in my opinion and my reason
behind that not being as much of an
issue as it used to be as the
competition that's taking place in the
CPU space since AMD launched horizon has
caused CPU manufacturers namely Intel to
really have to catch up in terms of what
AMD is offering we're talking about
overclockable CPUs more cores more
threads games I started becoming more
multi-threading friendly which means
that the CPU itself has been less of an
issue as it was back in like the early
2010's when FX was still the deal for
core 8 thread was the max you could get
on main stream but we're going to do
today is we're going to go ahead and
show you kind of an extreme example of
what bottlenecking really looks like and
then we're gonna kind of like tune it
out basically to kind of show you where
that sweet spot really is now you can
actually try this at home with your own
CPU if you guys want to if you're
running an Intel based CPU anyway I
don't know if AMD has as useful of a
tool but this is actually the intel
extreme tuning utility or XTU you can
download this it's free and if you have
an overclocking CPU it'll let you do
anything you want to it pretty much and
then if you don't I don't know what
settings will allow you to do I think
you can play with the ratio and bring it
down I just don't think you can
overclock but anyway this is an 8700 K
that what we've done so far as you can
see we have two active cores because we
turned it into basically a 70 100 now
yes I know the cache values are
different yes I know the cache frequency
and all that stuff is different this is
not intended to be like here's how
performance is on a 70 100 on an 80 183
but that's not what we're doing today
we're showing you examples what
bottlenecking looks like in a real case
scenario with a real game and stuff so
what we're doing is we're obviously
starting on the very opposite end of the
spectrum as bottlenecked as we think we
can get to show you what it looks like
in its definitive form with a twenty
atti on our test bench so obviously you
should never pair a 7100 to a twenty
atti that's guaranteed to bottleneck
which is exactly what we're doing here
today so this is just kind of our
extreme test right here so we're also
going to have MSI Afterburner open we
are gonna be running a slight overclock
on our graphics card because again we're
trying to get these two as far away from
each other as possible
and then we're gonna be actually using
shadow of the Tomb Raider because it has
really good tools built into their
benchmark to show us things like frame
timing CPU timing lots of different it
even show us what percentage of GPU
bound we are so obviously you see CPU
one two three four here because again
two cores four threads because we have
hyper threading enabled we also have our
settings that set to highest right now
which is kind of unfair for this test a
little bit because of the fact that if
we really wanted to see a CPU bound test
where we're bottle necking we'd want to
have less post-processing filter it's
going and higher higher frame rates
which would push our CPU even harder but
for the sake of this test we are just
leaving everything maxed we can see
right now with the test running look
bouncing between 95 and a hundred
percent utilization on the CPU and
because of that our GPU utilization is
extremely low even in 1080p our fps is
only sitting in the 50s with a twenty
atti you can see we hit a hundred on all
of them for a second there but our GPU
is spending a lot of time just waiting
for the CPU and that's indicative by
these high spikes where suddenly the FPS
will climb a little bit and then come
back down but you can kind of see a
median line sort of drawn through the
middle we're starting to you know dip
right there down to the forties
obviously as we dip so does our frames
are our GPU utilization all right so as
you can see right here it's not fully
rendered because watch this got some
flickering there and then we're gonna
see a big pop or the mountain come in
there it is there's the rest of the
scene so that's an example of one thing
that happens with an under spec CPU
versus the games minimum specs which is
clearly not a good thing
seeing that popping in like that but
once again look our GPU till it's all
the way down to the 30s our core clock
has even suffered because obviously it's
not gonna ramp up the core clock if it's
not even being utilized so this scene is
only being rendered with thirteen
hundred and fifty megahertz with the GPU
because the CPU is absolutely 100%
pegged so the reason why we use this
particular benchmark for this video is
because you can see we get a lot of
information including a graph so this is
our GPU graph for a GPU CPU relative
graph here so as you can see the CPU is
taken much longer to do things in the
GPU is but if this orange line was above
the green line this could be an instance
of where you have a very
CPU with a very slow GPU where the GPU
is then with the CPUs waiting on to be
able to get the next scene and then next
frame ready so we can see right here a
GPU bound 0% and that's a that's kind of
a problem so we obviously saw too that
our CPU was pretty much maxed out during
that test because we're going to do now
I'm gonna change the CPU now to from
theoretically a 70 100 to an 80 100
which means now we're going to get rid
of hyper-threading we're going to enable
two more course we have 4 physical cores
but instead of having it running at 3.9
which is the maxed speed for these chips
to remember they have no - they have no
turbo clock on those models we're gonna
reduce it down to 3.6 because that's
what the 8100 is all right so test 2 we
have it running at 3600 megahertz or 3.6
gigahertz with 4 active cores no
hyper-threading and our cash ratio is
set to match so we're gonna run the
exact same test all the same settings as
you can see here the graphics are all
set to highest same sort of thing in the
menu though but you'll notice instead of
pegging up in the 90s we go down to the
70s for a little bit so we're gonna look
at initially when we start this test is
what happens on the initial utilization
of the graphics card as well as the CPU
alright so in the initial tests we are
sitting in the 90s obviously still 1/4
hit at 100 that hundreds gonna bounce
around but our utilization came up
significantly remember it was sitting in
the 50s initially and then dropped down
to the 30s well now we hit the 60s and
our drop down into the 40s in terms of
utilization on the GPU still seeing a
hundred percent though on the core is
bouncing around so obviously we are
still seeing the CPU cause a bottleneck
to our GPU because we want this number
to be at least 85 to 90 percent or
higher if we see this go up into the 90s
and we know the GPU is now what we're
bound by because the GPU is being
utilized to its you know its full
capacity or full potential but if this
number is sending this low that is what
a bottleneck is and that's what we're
trying to avoid so by doing nothing more
than switching from hyper threading to
for physical cores emulating an i7 80 or
a 380 101 i7 8100 would be that would be
interesting CPU but I digress we've gone
up from 72 to 88 and as you can see
right here GPU bound is still 0% but
we're get close but what you're gonna
notice is both charts as a whole moved
down because of the time
it took because these are measured in
milliseconds this is the time for it to
do the task and as you can see
everything just slid down on that chart
so that's obviously an improvement but
we still are clearly gonna be
bottlenecks although in the menu we went
from 7d ish 78% to like 93 which is
crazy because the menu does indeed
render the game in the background so
we're gonna do now is I want to see what
happens now if we just give it a
crap-ton of course feed so we're gonna
overclock this to 5.2 gigahertz and
we're gonna see what happens to that fps
by having the same core count the same
cache the same number of threads
obviously and the same CPU settings the
same or the same GPU settings we still
have the same overclock going on our 28
ETI and see how much more we gained by
overclocking so here's what we did we
overclocked it to 5.2 gigahertz with a
50 ratio on the cache that's not
something that exists it's not something
that you can even try to do with your
own 8100 because remember it's a locked
CPU so that's why we use CPUs like the
8700 K and then and 100 K to do our
emulation or emulating of other CPUs
because we can take it and dial it to
where we want to see what theoretical
you know performance is like at
different frequencies that you couldn't
otherwise do by just popping in an 80
100 so although the cache amount is a
little bit different I don't believe
that is enough difference between the
CPUs to invalidate our test like I said
the start though this is all theoretical
to show you what bottlenecking looks
like it's not meant to be an exact
representation of the CPU that we're
trying to emulate so it dropped down
into the 50s and 60s at the start here
did start at about 70 went up to 81 and
then came down as this test is happening
but look we're seeing a lot less of the
100 pegged there's one it's still pretty
high obviously and still clearly
bottlenecked even running at 5.2
gigahertz on this one test you can tell
to the DP look how cool it's running
check this out so we went to GPU bound
2% which is right down here
where I said it was gonna potentially
happen again everything moved down
because the max chart before was 30
milliseconds now it's 20 so you can see
things are getting faster specifically
because of the CPU but our we went up
from 88 to 105 on our average frames per
second and then you can compare
obviously down here on the bottom with
the min max
that was but then it really did improve
obviously but we are still clearly
overall bottlenecking our GPU so the
issue here is that if you were running
something like a twenty atti and put it
on a cpu like this then there's a whole
lot of performance that you paid for
that you're not getting so we're gonna
do now is we are going to go ahead and
unlock the cpu and go normal eighty
seven hundred K at five gigahertz and
we're gonna see theoretically what the
performance looks like what the GPU
bound looks like with not introducing
any sort of a bottleneck at all and what
you're gonna see right now is that our
CPU utilization is gonna stay fairly low
but our GPU should jump up into the 90s
oh it dropped down to 82 guess no we're
bottlenecking but you know look at our
CPU it's not so it's possible to that
this engine is just not using an entire
twenty atti in terms of utilization but
this is still considered a good yuto
because our cpu as you can see is not
pegging on any of the course one of the
reasons why we're not actually doing
like a 1440p or 4k test is because i if
we're talking about bottom lucky and
those that are running low-end CPUs I
think it's extremely rare that you're
gonna find someone running a 70 100 or
an 80 100 with a 4k panel possibly a
1440 but if you guys want us to do
another video where we test very similar
type deals and see how resolution
affects various CPU speeds then make
sure you guys comment down below that
you want us to make that video and we'll
do it everybody I give this one I like
to and our average went up to 121 FPS so
we gained a wife a 105 to 121 by
unlocking you know obviously all of our
cores so I bet you anything if we ran a
ninety nine hundred K or another CPU
with more threads we'd probably see even
higher FPS with this same GPU so here's
we're gonna do now we're gonna pop in at
1660 which is a much more mid-range
graphics card with the same low-end CPUs
and we're gonna see exactly how it
compared we're gonna spare you guys
going through all the tests we're just
gonna show you all the charts at the end
all right here we go 99 percent GPU
bound with the 1660 on the fully
unlocked 8700 k overclocked but you can
tell that were GPU bound because if you
look right here in our frame rendering
times you can see that our GPU is higher
than the
cp1 everything so the cpu was like hey
here's your frame do what you need to do
to it and we're ready for the next one
come on are you ready for us so the cpu
was literally waiting on the GPU which
is 100% non bottlenecks in this case so
as you saw the twenty atti is obviously
a bad pairing for low-end CPUs because
there's a lot of performance you'd be
paying for in here that you're not
necessarily getting at least with this
one title I mean there's there's so many
different variations that we could have
done we could have chosen any CPU where
to be rise in or Intel any particular
game title and the results would be
different because it's impossible to
have any test scenario account for all
the different you know combinations that
there would be out there so this is just
an example of what bottlenecking sort of
looks like but obviously with the
hypothetical CPUs we had setup there was
a lot of fluctuation in fps
swinging all over the place with the 28
et I give me a terrible 0.1 and 1% lows
which is why you see a lot of reviewers
use those figures because average is
only one piece of the puzzle are and
then obviously if point 1 and 1% lows
are really low versus your average then
you're gonna see huge stutters which we
were seeing with this that's why with
the 1660 we saw a very very tight line
across the board even all the way down
to the 7 100 and I was surprised that we
were only 63% GPU bound with the 1660 I
thought it was gonna be a lot higher
which goes to show that the CPU race
over the last several years has
definitely made a CPU experience for
gamers a whole lot better in terms of
bottlenecking because you have to try
pretty hard that's because of the 5
gigahertz becoming much more common the
thread count on CPUs especially on
mainstream and the lower end stuff has
definitely gotten more inclusive to
include you know 4 6 8 cores plus hyper
threading or SMT depending on which
platform you're running you're
definitely benefitting from that race
one other thing too worth pointing out
though too is if you were running a 60
Hertz panel with vsync or g-sync on like
this is a g-sync 60 hertz panel if we
had g-sync turned on with an vsync we
would have gotten exactly the same
performance between both of these cards
because the 1660 even with the 70 100
achieved above 60fps on an average so
there you go
one of the things we're pointing out to
though is that these settings were on
max
and so if we had reduced any of the
post-processing quality we would have
introduced an even bigger bottleneck but
I didn't do that today because I want to
just sort of max out the game as a sort
of a baseline test and then see how
things went from there because I think
most people want to shoot for the most I
can do that they can and so we just use
that as our baseline but it's worth
noting if we had gone to like a medium
setting we would have seen even a lower
GPU utilization and even in higher CP
bottleneck but you guys wants to be more
tests like this in the future please
sound off in the comments below this is
a direct response to some of the
comments I saw on our our budget pcs
actually worth it video and this is that
response thanks for watching guys and as
always we'll see you in the next one we
realized that face swapping Brian's face
on to my youngest daughter looks like
Steven Burke from gamers and exes twenty
hundred ti twenty twenty hundred twenty
hundred twenty hundred it videos next
big thing right there but how many more
rains were friended though rains were
friend or